# What is minikube?
Minikube is local Kubernetes, focusing on making it easy to learn and develop for Kubernetes.

All you need is Docker (or similarly compatible) container or a Virtual Machine environment, and Kubernetes is a single command away: `minikube start`

# Prerequisite
* 2 CPUs or more
* 2GB of free memory
* 20GB of free disk space
* Internet connection
* Container or virtual machine manager, such as: Docker, QEMU, Hyperkit, Hyper-V, KVM, Parallels, Podman, VirtualBox, or VMware Fusion/Workstation

# Installation
https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/start/

# Goal of this exercise
* Understand cluster, node, deployment concepts
* Use Kubectl to interact with the cluster

# Simple operations

## Step 1. Start your local cluster
`minikube start`

## Step 2. Start a cluster dashboard
`minikube dashboard`

## Step 3. Create a deployment
`kubectl create deployment hello-node --image=registry.k8s.io/e2e-test-images/agnhost:2.39 -- /agnhost netexec --http-port=8080`

## Step 4. View the Deployment
`kubectl get deployments`

``` 
NAME         READY   UP-TO-DATE   AVAILABLE   AGE
hello-node   1/1     1            1           1m
```

## Step 5. View the Pod
`kubectl get pods`
```
NAME                          READY     STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
hello-node-5f76cf6ccf-br9b5   1/1       Running   0 
```

## Step 6 View cluster events
`kubectl get events`
```
LAST SEEN   TYPE     REASON                    OBJECT                             MESSAGE
83s         Normal   Scheduled                 pod/hello-node-7579565d66-tzzk6    Successfully assigned default/hello-node-7579565d66-tzzk6 to minikube
80s         Normal   Pulling                   pod/hello-node-7579565d66-tzzk6    Pulling image "registry.k8s.io/e2e-test-images/agnhost:2.39"
56s         Normal   Pulled                    pod/hello-node-7579565d66-tzzk6    Successfully pulled image "registry.k8s.io/e2e-test-images/agnhost:2.39" in 24.760728351s (24.760737275s including waiting)
55s         Normal   Created                   pod/hello-node-7579565d66-tzzk6    Created container agnhost
55s         Normal   Started                   pod/hello-node-7579565d66-tzzk6    Started container agnhost
83s         Normal   SuccessfulCreate          replicaset/hello-node-7579565d66   Created pod: hello-node-7579565d66-tzzk6
83s         Normal   ScalingReplicaSet         deployment/hello-node              Scaled up replica set hello-node-7579565d66 to 1
7m36s       Normal   Starting                  node/minikube                      Starting kubelet.
7m33s       Normal   NodeHasSufficientMemory   node/minikube                      Node minikube status is now: NodeHasSufficientMemory
7m33s       Normal   NodeHasNoDiskPressure     node/minikube                      Node minikube status is now: NodeHasNoDiskPressure
7m33s       Normal   NodeHasSufficientPID      node/minikube                      Node minikube status is now: NodeHasSufficientPID
7m35s       Normal   NodeAllocatableEnforced   node/minikube                      Updated Node Allocatable limit across pods
7m26s       Normal   Starting                  node/minikube                      Starting kubelet.
7m26s       Normal   NodeHasSufficientMemory   node/minikube                      Node minikube status is now: NodeHasSufficientMemory
7m26s       Normal   NodeHasNoDiskPressure     node/minikube                      Node minikube status is now: NodeHasNoDiskPressure
7m26s       Normal   NodeHasSufficientPID      node/minikube                      Node minikube status is now: NodeHasSufficientPID
7m26s       Normal   NodeAllocatableEnforced   node/minikube                      Updated Node Allocatable limit across pods
7m26s       Normal   NodeNotReady              node/minikube                      Node minikube status is now: NodeNotReady
7m16s       Normal   NodeReady                 node/minikube                      Node minikube status is now: NodeReady
7m13s       Normal   RegisteredNode            node/minikube                      Node minikube event: Registered Node minikube in Controller
7m12s       Normal   Starting                  node/minikube
```
## Step 7. View config:
`kubectl config view`

## Step 8. View logs:
`kubectl logs hello-node-<blah>`

## Step 9. Make the node accessible outside kubernetes
`kubectl expose deployment hello-node --type=LoadBalancer --port=8080`

The `--type=LoadBalancer` flag indicates that you want to expose your Service outside of the cluster.

The application code inside the test image only listens on TCP port 8080. If you used kubectl expose to expose a different port, clients could not connect to that other port.

## Step 10. View the Service:
`kubectl get services`

## Deployment vs Service
### Deployment:
Purpose: A Deployment is primarily responsible for maintaining a specified number of pod replicas running. It provides declarative updates for Pods and ReplicaSets.

####  Components:

Pods: The smallest deployable units in Kubernetes that can be created and managed. They host your application containers.

ReplicaSets: Ensures that a specified number of pod replicas are maintained. If a Pod fails, the ReplicaSet creates a new one to replace it.
Features:

Rolling Updates: Deployments allow you to update the Pod template and roll out updates gradually, ensuring zero downtime.

Scaling: You can scale the number of Pods in a Deployment up or down.

Revisions & Rollbacks: Maintains a revision history allowing you to roll back to a previous version if needed.
Pod Health: Replaces Pods that become unhealthy or unresponsive.

Use Case: When you want to deploy a stateless application, manage its desired state, and easily update or rollback when necessary.

### Service:
Purpose: A Service in Kubernetes is an abstraction that defines a set of Pods and a policy to access them. Its primary purpose is to provide a stable IP address, DNS name, and port through which the Pods can be accessed, even as they are scaled or replaced.

####  Types of Services:

ClusterIP: Internal-only IP. Default service type and is only reachable within the cluster.

NodePort: Exposes the service on a static port on each Node’s IP.

LoadBalancer: Exposes the service externally using a cloud provider's load balancer.

ExternalName: Maps a service to a DNS name.
Features:

Stable Endpoint: Provides a consistent IP address and DNS name, even if underlying Pods are replaced.

Load Distribution: Distributes network traffic to all Pods matching the service's selector.

Service Discovery: Kubernetes supports two primary modes of finding a Service - environment variables and DNS.

Use Case: When you need a consistent way to access a set of Pods or when you want to expose an application externally.

## Step 11. Run the app in your browser
`minikube service hello-node`

## Step 12. Check addon list

`minikube addons list`

## Step 13. Cleanup
```
kubectl delete service hello-node
kubectl delete deployment hello-node
```


# Nodeport
## Step 1. create a deployment and expose it
```
kubectl create deployment hello-minikube --image=kicbase/echo-server:1.0

kubectl expose deployment hello-minikube --type=NodePort --port=8080
```

## Step 2. check the status and port forward
check if the service is running

`kubectl get services hello-minikube`

use kubectl to forward the port

`kubectl port-forward service/hello-minikube 7080:8080`

Your application is now available at http://localhost:7080/.

## Step 3. delete
`kubectl delete service hello-minikube`

`kubectl delete deployment hello-minikube`

# LoadBalancer


## Step 1. Create a deployment and expose it
```
kubectl create deployment balanced --image=kicbase/echo-server:1.0

kubectl expose deployment balanced --type=LoadBalancer --port=8080
```
## Step 2. Open a Tunnel
start the tunnel to create a routable IP for the ‘balanced’ deployment

`minikube tunnel`


Open `http://localhost:8080/`

## Step 3. Scale up
`kubectl scale --replicas=3 deployment/balanced`

`kubectl get deployments`

Now refresh the link a few times and see if the load balancer is taking effect

## Step 4. Cleanup
`kubectl delete service balanced`
`kubectl delete deployment balanced`


# Ingress

## Step 1. Enable Ingress Addon
`minikube addons enable ingress`

## Step 2. Apply the contents
`kubectl apply -f https://storage.googleapis.com/minikube-site-examples/ingress-example.yaml`


## Step 3. check address available
`kubectl get ingress` 
```
NAME              CLASS   HOSTS   ADDRESS          PORTS   AGE
example-ingress   nginx   *       <your_ip_here>   80      5m45s
```

## Step 4. Open a Tunnel
`minikube tunnel`

## Step 5. Open another tab and hit the endpoint
`curl 127.0.0.1/foo`
```
Request served by foo-app
...
```

`curl 127.0.0.1/bar`

```
Request served by bar-app
...
```


## Step 6. Cleanup
```
kubectl delete -f https://storage.googleapis.com/minikube-site-examples/ingress-example.yaml
```



# Deploy our first demoapp via yaml file
## Step 1. Understand demoapp.yaml
Open `minikube/config/demoapp.yaml`

```
apiVersion: apps/v1
```
apiVersion: This defines the version of the Kubernetes API you're using to create this object. For Deployments, the version is typically apps/v1.

```
kind: Deployment
```
kind: This specifies the type of resource you want to manage, in this case, a Deployment. Deployments are high-level objects that allow for declarative updates to Pods and ReplicaSets.


```
metadata:
  name: demoapp
  namespace: jiangren
```

metadata: Information to uniquely identify the Deployment.

name: The name assigned to this Deployment.

namespace: The Kubernetes namespace where this Deployment is created. Here, it's jiangren.

```
spec:
  replicas: 12
```
spec: Specifies the desired characteristics of the Deployment.
replicas: The number of pod replicas you want to maintain. Here, it's 12.

```  
selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: demoapp
```
selector: Dictates how the Deployment recognizes the pods it should manage.

matchLabels: A map of {key, value} pairs. A pod must meet all label conditions to be considered a match. Here, it selects pods with the label `app=demoapp`.


```
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: demoapp
```

template: Defines the blueprint for the pods.

* metadata.labels: The labels to assign to each pod. This is crucial because the Deployment's selector will look for this label.


```
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: echo
          image: stevesloka/echo-server
          command: ["echo-server"]
          args:
            - --echotext=This is the jiangren test site!
          imagePullPolicy: IfNotPresent
          ports:
            - name: http
              containerPort: 8080
```

spec: Details of the container to be created in each pod.

containers: List of containers to be run within the pod.

name: Name of the container.

image: Docker image to be used.

command: Command run once the container starts. Overrides the 
default command provided by the Docker image.

args: Arguments passed to the command.

imagePullPolicy: Determines when to pull the image. IfNotPresent means it'll pull the image only if it doesn't exist locally.

ports: Specifies the port information of the container.

name: Name of the port (for reference purposes).
containerPort: The port on which the container will listen.

```
kind: Service
```
kind: Specifies that you're defining a Service, which is a construct to expose applications running on a set of pods.

```
  type: LoadBalancer
```
type: Specifies the type of service. LoadBalancer means it'll try to get an external IP to expose the Service.

## Step 2. Apply the contents
This will create the service and deploy your app
```
cd minikube/config
kubectl apply -f namespace.yaml
kubectl apply -f demoapp.yaml
```

## Step 3. Expose the service
```
minikube service demoapp --namespace=jiangren
```
or 

```
minikube tunnel
```


# CronJob

## Step 1. run the demo job
```
kubectl apply -f demojob.yaml
```

## Step 2. check the pods status and the logs
```
kubectl get pods -n jiangren
kubectl logs hello-28283126-x5tzg -n jiangren
```

## Step 3. read the demojob.yaml


## Step 4. check the cheatsheet to interact with pods
https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubectl/cheatsheet/



# Roll out a change to demoapp
## Step 1. Have a CI/CD to push your latest build to a registry
The push to registry will not be demoed in this note.

Here is how you can check the image version:
```
kubectl describe deployment demoapp -n jiangren | grep Image:
```


## Step 2. Set an image or update your yaml file

Method 1. change the yaml file and apply
```
...
spec:
  containers:
    - name: echo
      image: stevesloka/echo-server:NEW_VERSION
...
```

```
kubectl apply -f demoapp.yml
```

Method 2. simply use kubectl
``` 
kubectl set image deployment/demoapp echo=stevesloka/echo-server:NEW_VERSION -n jiangren
```
## Step 3. Monitor the rollout

```
kubectl rollout status deployment/demoapp -n jiangren
```

## Step 4. Rollback If Needed:
```
kubectl rollout undo deployment/demoapp -n jiangren
```

## Step 5. Scaling and Managing:
As you've specified a large number of replicas (12), Kubernetes will ensure a rolling update with zero downtime. 

It will gradually terminate old pods and create new ones with the updated image.

The specifics of how many are terminated/created at once can be managed with strategy parameters in the Deployment, but that's an advanced topic. https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/deployment/

# ConfigMap
Many applications rely on configuration which is used during either application initialization or runtime. Most times, there is a requirement to adjust values assigned to configuration parameters. ConfigMaps are a Kubernetes mechanism that let you inject configuration data into application pods.

The ConfigMap concept allow you to decouple configuration artifacts from image content to keep containerized applications portable. For example, you can download and run the same container image to spin up containers for the purposes of local development, system test, or running a live end-user workload.

## Basics
### Step 1. Create a config

Create a key value pair from command line. 
```
kubectl create configmap special-config --from-literal=special.how=very
```
You can also create key value pair from yaml file, env file, and any other local files.

### Step 2. Create the pod and check
Read the following file to understand how configMap is configured
```
kubectl create -f https://kubernetes.io/examples/pods/pod-single-configmap-env-variable.yaml
```

Run this command to check the injected configuration
```
kubectl logs dapi-test-pod
```

### Step 3. Clean up
```
kubectl delete configmap special-config
kubectl delete pod dapi-test-pod
```

## Config a Redis

### Step 1. Create the configMap
```
cd minikube/config
kubectl apply -f example-redis-config.yaml
```
check if the configuration is there
```
kubectl describe configmap/example-redis-config
```

### Step 2. Create a Redis pod
```
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kubernetes/website/main/content/en/examples/pods/config/redis-pod.yaml
```
and then check the values
```
kubectl exec -it redis -- redis-cli
```
Check maxmemory:
```
127.0.0.1:6379> CONFIG GET maxmemory
```
Check maxmemory-policy
```
127.0.0.1:6379> CONFIG GET maxmemory-policy
```

